Dreams to Memories – Wisdom in Ladakh
A ride to ladakh requires a lot of preparation and begins with convincing folks back home and also at the office. As a popular quote says “Four Wheels move the body and two wheels move the soul” just riding 2500 Kms in 15 days was not the only objective of the dream I had for some time now. It was also to ensure that there is enough learning from the ride to be taken back home and be a better human being apart from being a better rider. The ride on a RE to ladakh was in preparation for almost 3 years and as Kabir said “Slowly slowly O mind... Everything in own pace happens, Gardner may water a hundred buckets... Fruit arrives only in its season”, and happen to participate this July on the ride with ~70 other riders. The ride included a lot of scenic beauty, the challenge of riding on various kinds of surface gravels, slush, watercrossing, sand and tarmac included, mental and physical challenge. One of the first ritual of the day was briefing which included the route, regroup point, road situation, mistakes committed by other riders and challenges. One thing every rider was keen to listen during briefing was Riding Tips. These were not just the tips for the ride of the day but for the entire journey and was expected to be taken back home and apply when you ride anytime and anywhere. Every person’s life is a journey and we come across various challenges and paths which we have to cross and move ahead. The tips do have hidden meaning which I happen to think during the ride as to how this can benefit our daily life
• Look ahead of person you are following.
This tip was the first on day one. It is common in riding that you follow a person at a comfortable speed to reduce the stress and only when you need to speed up you plan to overtake. In this process what is missed out is the visibility beyond the lead. The visibility beyond the lead ignites the thought process as to the reason for the driving behavior of the person who is being followed. This also helps in anticipating any obstacles and challenges well in advance and be prepared. This changes from reactive mode of riding to the anticipative mode of riding.
For career growth you need to apply the same principle of looking beyond your manager in anticipating the challenges. Do not end your thought process where the manager begins, try and walk the path alongside to know the challenges handled by the manager and the approach taken to resolve. As a parent the tendency is to not provide the visibility to our children on the challenges the parent is undergoing. Parents try to carry the kids on their shoulders to avoid a treacherous path. This in no way helps the younger generation to be prepared for the path when they are required to over take or take a new path which the parent does not even has thought off.
• Do not overtake at corners
Day two required us to adapt from a terrain of straight lane roads to the curves of the mountains and we were greeted with very interesting sign boards. Quotes like Be Gentle on my Curves, I am Curvaceous be slow, Mountains are Pleasure Only if you drive with Leisure, Be Mr Late Not Late Mr, Life is Short don’t make it Shorter were there around to greet us. The first riding tip for the day was not to overtake in corners, specially the one turning left. Also the one re-iterated every day through the coming days was applying restraint in overtaking while the rider ahead is looking for the best path to cross the obstacles. Let me write about the second tip first. Every rider is comfortable at his a own pace on a challenging surface. As the skill set of people differ so does the speed. The person who is at a lower speed is certainly trying to negotiate the challenges and move ahead and would like to have his share of space to maneuver. The last thing he wishes is supplementary challenge by a more skilled rider by cramping the room while overtaking. Also he may not be prepared or even aware that there is rider behind him. The discipline which was followed through the days was to ask for way and then only on confirmation, overtake. The riders ahead also adhered to this by providing the clear path as early as possible. 
In Career and life Overtaking is generally viewed as egocentric. There is an urgency by people to overtake and also by some to block. It is very necessary that we know the strength and limitation of each fellow riders, respect each other and provide adequate time, path and safety to our colleagues, friends and family members.
Overtaking on blind corners is a strict no go on the road, career and life. This could cut short the journey.
• Hold your tanks hard; handlebar like eggs
The riding tip next given was the most important in terms of correction for riders and also the gains importance due to the terrain which we ride. It is very important to know that every bike balances by itself. There is no additional effort required by the rider to balance be it the smooth tarmac or the challenging gravels. Riders tend to hold the handlebar hard and take significant effort to balance the bike. This can be observed more in the riders who have upgraded from scooter or switch regularly between the two. In Motorcycle riding the rider need not balance the motorcycle, he just has to hold it hard. This can be done by holding the tanks by the thighs. The handle bar needs to be held very loose, as the lead rider aptly said hold it as if you are holding eggs. Apart from easy maneuvering, the chances of having a stiff shoulder is also reduced. To help the cause it would be good for riders to flap the elbow as if the birds are flapping the wings.
People also tend to balance life with lots of efforts and take control of things when it is obvious that what you need is just to guide. One needs to embrace Family, Friends and Faith tight and guide Career and Cash with very soft hand. This would certainly help to balance the journey comfortably and to cross all the obstacles and challenges without much effort.
• Find your own path
Robert Frost said, I took the one less traveled by, And that has made all the difference. This holds very much correct when you are riding especially in the slush. When you choose to ride on the tyre marks you are completely out of control. Similarly in the water crossings, on the gravel or sand the path chosen by the rider ahead may not be the best. On the way to Kardungla top fellow riders were taking a path and a line was formed, to the utter dismay of the riders coming from the opposite direction. No one was willing to move a couple of feet to the left and make a new path. A rider should always keep his mind open and look for new path which may or may not be less challenging.
• Use your side of the road fully.
This was a riding tip given to me by the fellow rider after observing me ride on the far left of the road. This is a habit cultivated by riding on road with dividers. When a person rides on the road where there is no separation for bi directional traffic, it is very important to ensure that you are visible to the vehicles coming from the other direction. By riding on the right side of your lane, using 1/3rd of the road, you not only increase your visibility of the road, but also get enough space for you to move to the left if need be.
People have the tendency to be invisible in office just doing their part of the work diligently. This is no way helps to know what is in the store for you in the near future both in terms of progression or opportunities available. Similar behavior is more visible at home when it comes to managing finance or parenting, where in one of the partner is in the far left with no contribution.
• Do not set targets
This is the most common error a rider commits. An obstacle be it a pot hole, rock, stones, upcoming vehicles once visible, a rider needs to look at a clear path and concentrate on the path identified. Concentrating on the obstacle is akin to setting a target and you are bound to move towards the target and not away from it. The hands move towards the direction which you are viewing, unless you are trained in a circus to do otherwise. You ride in the direction your visibility is focused.
People tend to waste their energy in getting into disputes which are nothing but target setting. There is no benefit in most of the cases but for inflation of ego. It is always better to move on in life than to set targets which could consume a lot of time and energy. EOD can mean 5.30 PM or 12.00AM, the one you choose is when you deliver. People look at Doughnut hole when you are asked to look at Doughnut as a Whole.
• Look up and set momentum
While crossing streams, you would be fortunate if the water is clear and you have some visibility of what is in store. Irrespective of the visibility, a rider cannot take any decision once he begins to cross, the direction cannot be changed nor can afford to stop in the middle, the formula here is keep your head up and ensure that the momentum takes you across the other side. Momentum alone helps you in overcoming small rocks, potholes or the current of the stream.
In office or personal life when the path is treacherous, do not try to change the path, pause or look down to see what is there beneath. One needs to ensure that proper momentum is maintained and move ahead, earlier one sets the momentum faster s/he crosses the stream.
• Be on Gas at corner
This could be termed as the best riding tip provided in the entire expedition. The vehicle is less stable when ‘off gas’ and more when ‘on gas’. This is because of the distribution of weight. When the vehicle is off gas the weight moves towards front and the vehicle is hard to maneuver, when you give gas, the weight moves to back and the handle becomes light. Also vehicle is more stable when on straight line and less when in the corner. While on the corner you already have one variable of stability to negotiate, breaking and slowing down would add to the complexity. The solution to this is, you break and change the gear before you hit the corner and as soon as you hit the corner and at optimum speed, give gas. The difference in riding comfort and stability would certainly be visible. 
It is utmost important that people do not wait until end of the turbulence to start ploughing in energy to gain momentum. Find out the different variables which are the cause of instability and the relationship between those. You could find out the one’s which could be inversely proportional and adjust timing to ensure that you convert on variable otherwise detrimental into a strength. Set your eyes on the next corner.
• Tune your carb/ Check spark plug
The rest day was used to be with our loved ones (motor cycles). People love their RE because they need to spend a good amount of time with it and consequently fall in love. It is also very important to be hands on for daily checkup during long rides and minor maintenance and repairs. The day was utilized by one of the lead riders in educating us on daily physical, visible check to be carried out before riding events, cleaning of air filters, maintaining the chain, removing and fixing wheels. The most important learning however was the ignition plug analysis.
Carbureted engines are now being replaced by EFI in modern motorcyles which are auto tuned. In Carbureted engines the tuning for mix of Air and Fuel is manually carried out. It is very important that the tuning is appropriate and the engine is neither lean burning nor high in fuel consumption. It is very important that the Carb is optimally tuned. The third dimension to this is the ignition plug. It not only provides the ignition but also provides the data relating to the tuning of Carb. Looking at the ignition plug one can identify if the engine is burning lean, optimal or high. 
Every individual has to balance his air (Family, Friends time) and Fuel (Career) and then check his ignition plug (Energy level) regularly and tune his life to balance between the two. It is very important that the tuning is optimal and the right result is achieved only when the air and fuel are mixed appropriately to gain the right amount of torque (energy). Riding EFI is similar to being planned by outlook calendar.
• Scenic vs endurance – decide
In the morning briefing we were told about the distance to be covered to reach our destination for the day. Some days it was higher than the other days. On the days where we had more distance to cover and the road was challenging the clear instruction provided to us was that, it is a day for endurance test, spend little time on the road enjoying scenic beauty, there are thousands of them in forthcoming days. The need of the day is to test of endurance and the best way is to be on the motorcycle most of the time unless for a break for rest or food. 
Life requires you to plan your journey into one requiring endurance or enjoy the scenic beauty on regular basis. When you are required to spend your energy in office deliverable or at home give your full commitment towards the same, because you will get your time when you would get time of leisure. When you are relaxed, enjoy the time by utilizing it fully by taking up the hobby you have, reading, travelling, taking additional courses, cooking or anything which you enjoy and keeps you occupied. It certainly does not mean you can be lazing around, as you have to get back to your bike and continue riding.
• Ride your bike
In the evening the discussion during the dinner used to revolve around the time taken for ride and how it could have been different had a person used an off road bike instead of a cruiser/City bike. Every rider has chosen a bike to buy and ride on a given day/journey. Once you decide to have it you cannot change it at least on that day or journey. However the decision can be revisited for the next trip. Accordingly one would not enjoy the journey if he starts thinking of how others are better off on another set of bike. The simple solution is ride your bike and enjoy the journey.
Do not compare yourself with others in career or personal life. It entirely depends on the decision taken at appropriate time. One would not be able to change the path without impacting time and energy. Enjoy the journey you have started until you reach a point which gives you a chance to change the direction if need be.
• Farther from Home, lower the risk
One of the reason for low rate of incidents during the ride was the known fact that a minor error could result in packing the bag back home. Every rider had taken enough pain in convincing the near and dear one and at office to get to the ride. No one wanted to risk on the ride and was very cautious through. It was reiterated time and again that the risk to be taken needs as low as possible.
This holds good in any field. One may be very comfortable in doing things in their own turf. When it comes to areas where a person has to move out of their expertise, the activity becomes challenging but needs to be handled with cautious. Further you move from the strength, one has to be very cautious and ensure that the risk is worth taking. This is very evident in entrepreneurial activities where the younger generation have a high risk taking temperament which tends to get generally lower as they grow old. First plan and prepare your home turf closer to the challenge and then lower the risk.
• Stop first and then park
This is something which was not told in the briefing but learnt the hard way. When riding the tendency is to get off the tarmac to stop and park. I would say first stop on the tarmac and then park on the side. The side path is unknown and could post you a lot of challenges.
People are required to take a break in career to cater to personal requirement be it higher education or family needs. The mistake committed is to move to new job to ensure that enough time is available for personal requirement. A person could be better off to take up role in current organization which could provide some spare time or go on sabbatical and then revert back with an easy start when s/he is prepared. This way s/he slows down and start back on the strong tarmac without having to negotiate the unknown.
Every event provides one with an experience it is upto one to convert a dream into memory and a learning.
“Mountains should be climbed with as little effort as possible and without desire. The reality of your own nature should determine the speed. If you become restless, speed up. If you become winded, slow down. You climb the mountain in an equilibrium between restlessness and exhaustion.” 
